http://nursingcenter.com/cearticle?tid=1092604
Early Postoperative Ambulation:
Back to Basics
A quality improvement project increases postoperative
ambulation and decreases patient complications.
The ambulation of patients soon after surgery,
now a fundamental part of nursing care,
wasn’t common practice until the middle
of the past century. In an article published in 1949,
D. J. Leithauser, a Detroit surgeon, stated, “Ten
years ago early ambulation was considered a ‘crackpot’
idea. Today, it is recognized and is rapidly approaching
a ‘must’ procedure following a surgical
operation.”1 Indeed, the practice of having patients
walk as soon as possible after surgery constituted
a major change in patient care, based on then new
evidence of the benefits of exercise and its positive
impact on patient recovery. Since then, facilitating
ambulation has been considered an important part
of excellent nursing care, particularly in postoperative
patients.
Despite the widespread belief that early ambulation
promotes surgical recovery, when we attempted
to research the subject we found little evidence to support
this nursing practice. To our surprise, we found
only one published study on the effect of ambulation
alone on postoperative ileus, and the findings did not
support the use of early ambulation as a means of increasing
gut motility.2
 Early ambulation after surgery
has been included as part of multimodal, fast-track,
or enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) perioperative
programs. Although many small studies have
reported reduced complication rates or lengths of
stay with fast-track programs,3-5 a recent Cochrane
review found that the evidence was not of sufficiently
high quality to justify implementing a fast-track or
ERAS program as standard care.6
 (It should be noted
that there seems to be no consensus among published
studies on the exact definition of early ambulation;
in our institution, the term refers to patients getting
out of bed and walking on the day of surgery, and
patients are told before surgery to expect this.)
As health care has evolved, technology has come
to play an ever-greater role in nursing care; as a result,
computers are now prominent at the bedside.
The current focus on improving outcomes requires
not only that nursing care be provided in a timely
manner, but also that it be documented in the medical
record as quickly and accurately as possible. However,
with decreasing lengths of stay and increasing
requirements placed on nurses, time to perform basic
nursing care is limited. As Storfjell and colleagues
demonstrated, many nurses spend more than half
their time in non–direct care activities.7
At our institution, there were two problems related
to postoperative ambulation. First, patients
were informed before surgery that they would be expected
to get out of bed and ambulate the day of surgery,
but because of other demands on nursing time,
nurses and nursing assistants were not always able
to accomplish early ambulation. Therefore, some patients
who didn’t receive the expected assistance in
ambulating complained, and physical therapists who
received some of these patients’ requests for ambulation
assistance objected, because this is a standard
nursing function. Second, although there were a variety
of areas within the nursing documentation system
to document ambulation, none was readily viewable
by other providers who needed to know this information.
We addressed both problems in the quality
improvement intervention described here.
Nursing case managers, information technology
staff, nursing administrators, and unit leaders agreed
to work together to make patient ambulation a higher
priority. The project team developed and implemented
several information technology strategies, described
below, to improve ambulation and its documentation
specifically on the colorectal and urologic general
surgery units. Administrative data on complications,
length of stay, and cost of care were used to evaluate
the impact of increased ambulation on surgical recovery.
METHODS
This project employed a variety of strategies to change
nursing practice related to early postoperative ambulation
and its documentation. The outcomes of this
project were identified in the literature on postoperative
ambulation and included complications, length of
By Valerie A. Kibler, RN, NP, Rachel M. Hayes,
PhD, RN, Dana E. Johnson, BSN, RN, Laura
W. Anderson, BA, RN, Shari L. Just, BSN, RN,
and Nancy L. Wells, DNSc, RN, FAAN
64 AJN ? April 2012 ? Vol. 112, No. 4 ajnonline.com
CULTIVATING QUALITY
stay, and cost. The impact of the intervention was
examined using a preintervention–postintervention
design. Comparisons were also made with control
units.
Setting. The project was conducted at Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, a 918-bed academic medical
center in Nashville, Tennessee, with a commitment
to information technology. The intervention was implemented
on four surgical units with a total of 60
beds. Evaluation data were obtained from patients
with specific diagnosis-related groupings (DRGs)
pertaining to colorectal and urologic surgeries, the
predominant patient populations on the four intervention
units. Patients with the same DRGs who received
care on other units served as controls.
Sample. To evaluate the impact of the program,
we compared documentation, distance ambulated,
and patient outcomes for six months before the intervention
(July through December 2008) and six
months after (July through December 2009). In
January 2009, the intervention strategies were implemented.

There was a six-month “washout” period from
January 1 to July 1, 2009 to match study time frames,
establish the new nursing practice, and reduce any
possibility of a Hawthorne effect. All patients admitted
for colorectal and urologic surgeries without
contraindications for progressive ambulation (such
as physician-ordered bed rest, paralysis, or spina bifida)
were included in the analysis.
Intervention. The interventions used to increase
ambulation and improve documentation included
revising evidence-based orders, measuring and posting
distances on the four general postsurgical nursing
units, creating fields in the electronic medical
record (EMR) to display ambulation distances, educating
staff on the benefits of early ambulation and
the necessity of proper documentation, and extending
the functionality of an existing dashboard application
(known as a whiteboard) that appears on all
computer screens and provides easy monitoring of
documented patient ambulation.
The team that implemented the intervention consisted
of the six nurses who are coauthors of this article.
Two RN case managers in the colorectal and
urologic surgical units (DEJ, LWA) began the project
by enlisting the other providers. In addition to the two
case managers, the team included two doctorally prepared
nurses (RMH, NLW), an evidence-based medicine
specialist (SLJ), and a systems support specialist
Table 1. Staff Education Strategies
Educator Strategy Timetable
Systems support services
representative
Showed nurses where within the nursing record to document
ambulation (information entered in this field appears as colorcoded
indicators on the computer whiteboard, so staff can see
ambulation reminders)
1 hour
Systems support services
representative
Printed screenshots of PowerPoint slides showing ambulation
documentation in the nursing documentation system and posted
them on bulletin boards in staff break rooms for reference
1 hour
Physical therapy department Measured individual distances per unit and put them on small
laminated cards applied to computers for reference
3 hours
Electronic medical record
programmers
Added ambulation indicator to computerized whiteboard
display to allow viewing on all computer screens
1 week
Case managers, systems support
services representative
Presented education and project goals to nursing staff at staff
meetings
20 minutes per session
Case managers, systems support
services representative
Held one-on-one discussions with nursing staff who couldn’t
attend staff meetings
5–10 minutes per
discussion
Case managers, systems support
services representative
Repeated rounding to engage nursing staff in project and
answer questions as needed
5–10 minutes,
3–4 times per week
Case managers, systems support
services representative, unit
charge nurses
Organized celebration for staff after completion of project; charge
nurses displayed posters and provided candy to all nursing staff
on pilot units for one week in recognition of their participation
3 hours for planning
and preparation
ajn@wolterskluwer.com AJN ? April 2012 ? Vol. 112, No. 4 65
(VAK). The systems support specialist assisted nursing
staff with computerized documentation systems
and worked with all members of the patient care team
to increase efficiency and seamlessly incorporate computerized
applications into their workflow.
Literature search. The work began with a literature
search on the effects of ambulation on postsurgical
patient outcomes, using the following PubMed
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms: early ambulation,
abdomen/surgery, postoperative care/adverse
effects, postoperative complications, ileus/prevention
and control, and colorectal surgery. The literature
suggested that ambulation, in conjunction with other
postsurgical interventions, may produce positive outcomes.
The single study that tested only postoperative
ambulation reported no positive effect on recovery
of gastric motility in a small sample (N = 34), but
still encouraged its use because it helps prevent deep
vein thrombosis and muscle atrophy, among other
beneficial effects.2
 Based on the literature, we determined
that early postoperative ambulation was a safe
practice (none of the studies that examined early ambulation
in combination with other strategies to promote
postoperative recovery reported any adverse
events) and may lead to improved patient outcomes,
such as fewer complications, shorter lengths of stay,
and lower costs of care.
Documentation of ambulation. The team modified
the provider order sets within the computerized
provider order entry system to state definitively that
nurses must not only ambulate their patients but
also accurately document ambulation in measured
distances. To achieve this, the physical therapy department
measured the distances between common
landmarks on the nursing units, such as the distance
from a patient’s bed to the bathroom, from the bed
to the door, and the length of a complete circuit of
the unit, and then listed these distances on laminated
cards that could be displayed beside the computers
used for nurse charting.
The systems support specialist proposed the use
of computerized reminders to help nursing staff document
ambulation in a consistent manner and collaborated
with the facility’s EMR programming team
to add an ambulation indicator to the existing whiteboard
that displays updated patient information from
the EMRs, such as new order sets, laboratory test results,
Braden Scale scores, and fall risk.8
 The indicators
turn yellow at 7 am and 7 pm to remind nurses
on the new shift that ambulation documentation is
needed. A red indicator means that ambulation hasn’t
been documented since noon or midnight of the previous
shift. A green indicator means that ambulation
documentation is up to date. There are two versions
of the whiteboard: a version that’s compliant with the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
that doesn’t contain patients’ full names and that appears
on the computer screen when no one is actively
working at a given workstation, and another
“authenticated” version with identifying information
that appears when a care provider logs in to
the system.
Staff education. The case managers and the systems
support specialist educated nursing staff on the
intervention units using a variety of strategies aimed
at encouraging nurses to meet the ambulation standard
of care (see Table 1). Staff education included the
project objectives (improved patient outcomes and
patient involvement in the team-based recovery effort),
the benefits of early ambulation (improved circulation
and bowel function), and the importance
of accurate documentation of distances ambulated
to quantify patients’ progress. Each educational session
lasted no longer than an hour.
The planning, the implementation of technologies,
and the initial staff training were completed
within three months. Changes to clinical care began
in January 2009. After the first hour-long meeting
to initiate the intervention, the team met twice more
after two and four weeks (days 14 and 28) to discuss
feedback from nursing staff and other providers, track
progress, identify problems, and develop solutions to
keep the project on course. Process questions arose:
for example, early in the implementation it was unclear
whether the nurse or the nursing assistant was
responsible for documenting ambulation (in practice,
whoever helps the patient ambulate—usually the
nursing assistant—should document it). To help sustain
the change in nursing practice, meetings were
held as needed to discuss issues that interfered with
early ambulation and documentation (we currently
Figure 1. Percentage of Patients with Documented Ambulation
on Intervention and Control Units
Percentage of patients with documented ambulation
0 20 40 60 80 100
46%
49.2%
61.9%
95.6%
Control unit Intervention
unit
Preintervention
Postintervention
Preintervention
Postintervention
66 AJN ? April 2012 ? Vol. 112, No. 4 ajnonline.com
CULTIVATING QUALITY
educate new staff members on the process as part of
their orientation).
As they had done prior to the intervention, nurses
continued to provide preoperative education on early
postoperative ambulation to patients in the clinic before
admission for surgery and on the colorectal and
urologic general surgery units when patients were preparing
for surgery.
Evaluation. We compared documented ambulation
and outcomes (complications, length of stay,
cost) before and after the improvement project to
evaluate the impact of the project on nursing practice
and patient outcomes. Were nurses more likely to
have their patients ambulate after the intervention?
Did their patients have better outcomes? Did documentation
of ambulation improve?
Nursing documentation of ambulation, patient
demographics, diagnosis and procedure codes, cost,
and length of stay were abstracted from the EMR and
administrative data systems. Estimates of patient acuity
(mild, moderate, severe, extreme) and expected
hospital lengths of stay were obtained from the University
HealthSystem Consortium (www.uhc.edu),
which uses administrative data from academic medical
centers to produce external benchmarks.
Periodically, we sought comments from project
participants, including nurses, nursing assistants, patients,
other providers, and administrators to provide
insight into the challenges and benefits of the program.
We used an internal accounting system to compare
the costs of care among patients with and without
postoperative paralytic ileus. Daily postoperative
treatment costs among patients in both groups were
similar, but median length of stay was six days longer
in those who developed the condition. Postoperative
patients with one complication are at increased risk
for further complications, and the independent costs
of treating isolated paralytic ileus could not be readily
extracted. Based on the costs associated with longer
lengths of stay, we conservatively estimated the cost
of treating a case of paralytic ileus at $5,800.
Analysis. We used multivariate linear regression
analysis to estimate the independent effect of the ambulation
intervention on length of stay and cost; we
also used logistic regression analysis to estimate the
independent effect of the intervention on complications.
We included an interaction term to analyze the
combined effect of time period (preintervention versus
postintervention) and patient unit (intervention
group versus control group) on patient outcomes.
This method controls for both time period and exposure
to the intervention. We further adjusted the
model for patient age, sex, acuity, colorectal versus
urologic surgery, expected length of stay, unit, and
time period. This was an intention-to-treat analysis
(all patients who had these surgeries and who were
assigned to the participating units were included in
the analysis; no patients were eliminated, even if they
didn’t or couldn’t ambulate). Statistical analyses were
performed with R statistical software, version 2.11.0.
Level of significance was P = 0.05.
RESULTS
There were 1,878 colorectal and urologic surgery
patients in the preintervention period and 1,748 in
the postintervention period. Median patient age was
56 years, and 58% of patients had colorectal surgery.
More patients in the postintervention period were
classified as moderately or severely ill and fewer as
mildly or extremely ill (see Table 2). The expected improvement
was observed on intervention units, where
the proportion of patients with documented ambulation
increased from 62% before the intervention to
96% afterward, while documented ambulation on
control units remained unchanged (see Figure 1). In
the postintervention period, the total documented
distance ambulated on the intervention units also increased
significantly, from 176 feet per patient day
to 264 feet per patient day. Despite the increased
ambulation on the intervention units, there was no
increase in patient falls reported from the preintervention
to the postintervention period.
Figure 2. Preintervention and Postintervention Rates of Paralytic
Ileus by Number of Postoperative Days on Intervention Units
Postoperative days on intervention units
Odds of paralytic ileus
Preintervention
Postintervention
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 2 4 6 8 10
The number of postoperative days spent on an intervention unit was significantly associated
with a decreased risk of paralytic ileus during the postintervention period (P = 0.003).
ajn@wolterskluwer.com AJN ? April 2012 ? Vol. 112, No. 4 67
Overall complication rates in all colorectal and
urologic surgical patients decreased from the preintervention
to the postintervention period, despite that
more patients were considered moderately or severely
ill in the postintervention period. However, while we
saw declines in complications on both control and
intervention units, only the decrease in the rate of
paralytic ileus among patients on the intervention
units, from 7.3% to 4.6% (a 37% decrease), was
statistically significant (P = 0.04) (see Table 3). Using
a multiple logistic regression model that estimated
the independent effect of the intervention on paralytic
ileus, time on an intervention unit was significantly
associated with a decreased risk of paralytic
ileus during the postintervention period (P = 0.003)
after adjusting for expected hospital length of stay,
age, and sex (see Figure 2).
Over the 18-month evaluation period, overall
length of stay and cost increased in both the intervention
and control units. Cost and hospital length
of stay are correlated and skewed; the average hospital
cost per patient in this population was $10,957,
while 50% of the cases cost less than $6,225. Total
costs increased 9% on control units and only 3.5%
on intervention units; however, this difference was
not statistically significant. Decreasing the rate of
paralytic ileus by 37% represents potential annual
cost savings of $830,000.
In addition, the new practice patterns established
routine clinical updates and discussions between case
managers and nursing staff regarding their patients’
discharge progress. Nurses and case managers initiated
the enhanced communication equally, with a focus
on minimizing potential discharge barriers.
Interviews with patients and the health care team
after the intervention illustrate the improved culture
of team collaboration and positive results. For example,
a 79-year-old man who had a radical nephrectomy
with a large chevron incision was sent to a
control unit following surgery because of bed availability.
There, he didn’t get out of bed often enough
and a physical therapy order was placed, resulting in
a recommendation for admission to a skilled nursing
facility upon discharge. Subsequently, he was transferred
to one of the intervention units, where he was
assessed, and the staff nurses and nursing assistants
soon had him up and ambulating in the hallway.
Based on this well-documented independent ambulation,
he was able to go home at discharge.
A physician commenting on the nursing care
provided on two of the intervention units stated:
Having a family member post-op on another
(control) floor recently, it was very clear that
ambulation was not a key goal on that floor,
and therefore my relative only walked if she
Table 2. Patient Characteristics
Characteristic Preintervention
(N = 1,878)
Postintervention
(N = 1,748) P Value
Surgery type, n (%)
Colorectal
Urologic
1,086 (58) 997 (57) NS
792 (42) 751 (43)
Sex, n (%)
Male
Female
1,095 (58) 930 (53) 0.002
783 (42) 818 (47)
Acuity, n (%)
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Extreme
705 (37) 594 (34) 0.02
672 (36) 678 (39)
287 (15) 310 (18)
214 (11) 166 (9)
Patients who had one surgical procedure, n (%) 1,671 (89) 1,573 (90) NS
Patients whose surgery was their primary
procedure, n (%)
1,540 (82) 1,433 (82) NS
Median age, years (IQR) 56.2 (43.8–65.1) 56.6 (44.7–65.7) NS
IQR = interquartile range; NS = not significant.
68 AJN ? April 2012 ? Vol. 112, No. 4 ajnonline.com
CULTIVATING QUALITY
initiated it. . . . I think the program drives
home the importance to return to function
for patients, improves their motivation, and—
as your data show—gets them discharged to
the right venue in a timely fashion (as opposed
to getting assessed the day before or
even of discharge because no one realized
the patient couldn’t walk).
This example was typical of comments made
during staff discussions and rounds, and reflects the
change in culture that occurred as a result of the
ambulation project.
DISCUSSION
The quality improvement project to increase early ambulation
at our hospital was successful; nurses were
more likely to document patient ambulation, and patients
were less likely to develop paralytic ileus. Moreover,
the project has given nurses a way to complete
their patient assessments and document the results in
measurable terms. Since this new process has been in
place, physicians, NPs, physical therapists, and other
members of the patient care team now refer to nursing
documentation to establish a comprehensive plan of
care. Accurately measured ambulated distances assist
case managers in establishing criteria for appropriate
placements and need for services upon discharge.
Both anecdotal reports and our own observations
indicate that the project has also led to stronger
nurse–patient relationships. As nurses established
daily goals for postoperative ambulation that were
consistent with provider orders, they were also able to
convey more clearly to patients what the expectations
were for such ambulation, and patients felt more in
control of their progress. All members of the health
care team agree that consistent, early, and frequent
postoperative ambulation improves both patient and
provider satisfaction and has decreased postsurgical
paralytic ileus, improved patient progress, and facilitated
appropriate patient discharges.
Cost and length of stay did not decrease in the
postintervention period for patients on the intervention
units as compared with the control units. Cost
and length of stay increased throughout the hospital
as patient acuity increased. In this broadly defined
population (all patients on the colorectal and urologic
surgical units), cost and length of stay are skewed and
highly variable; small changes may be overwhelmed
by this variability. These findings are not consistent
with results of small trials of fast-track or ERAS programs,
where cost4 and length of stay3-5 were positively
affected. However, we had more patients in
our sample than did any other study we examined
of early postoperative ambulation alone or as part
of a multimodal approach; the sample size and the
focus on ambulation alone may account for the differences
in findings.
We also evaluated the rate of complications, and
patients on the intervention units were less likely than
those on the control units to develop paralytic ileus.
The results of this project suggest that postoperative
ambulation does affect gut motility, in contrast to the
findings of Waldhausen and Schirmer.2
 Using internal
cost accounting methods, we estimated the average
incremental total costs (both direct and indirect) for
a case of paralytic ileus at $5,800, mostly because
of increased hospital length of stay. If all colorectal
Table 3. Number and Prevalence of Complications by Care Unit and Time Period
 Complication
Control Units Intervention Units
Preintervention
(n =1,125)
Postintervention
(n = 1,047)
Preintervention
(n = 753)
Postintervention
(n = 701)
Any, n (%) 216 (19.2) 184 (17.6) 62 (8.2) 43 (6.1)
Paralytic ileus, n (%) 148 (13.2) 111 (10.6) 55 (7.3) 32 (4.6)a
Surgical digestive
complication, n (%)
108 (9.6) 95 (9.1) 41 (5.4) 29 (4.1)
Any digestive
complication, n (%)
172 (15.3) 144 (13.7) 59 (7.8) 38 (5.4)
Cost (median hospital
cost per patient)
$7,192 $7,851 $5,082 $5,259
Length of stay (days) 3.7 3.8 1.7 2
a P = 0.04.
ajn@wolterskluwer.com AJN ? April 2012 ? Vol. 112, No. 4 69
and urologic surgery patients receive the piloted intervention,
the hospital could save roughly $830,000
annually by preventing approximately 144 cases of
paralytic ileus.
This project evaluation was based on nursing
documentation of ambulation; however, ambulation
can be performed and not documented or vice
versa. Nurses are very aware of the importance of
accurate charting, and we developed tools to make
charting the distance ambulated a simple procedure.
Throughout the program, we never observed nurses
circumvent the intention of the program by charting
nonexistent ambulation. On the intervention units,
nurses documented distance ambulated in feet, and
on the control units, nurses could chart ambulation
by distance or time. For the evaluation, both methods
of nurse charting were accepted as evidence that patient
ambulation was completed.
While the preintervention–postintervention study
design cannot completely control for hospital-wide
trends, a randomized trial wasn’t within the scope of
this quality improvement project. The project evaluation
attempted to control for hospital-wide trends
by comparing outcomes on intervention units to outcomes
on control units in both the preintervention
and postintervention periods. The control units included
the surgical step-down unit, and acuity was
higher in the control population. However, most
colorectal and urologic surgery patients are assigned
to a postoperative unit based on bed availability. The
qualitative analysis of the project would have benefited
from more structure, including structured interviews
or focus groups and anonymous surveys of
nurses and other stakeholders.
This project required no capital investment beyond
programming time and data analysis, which
were available at our institution. Nontechnologic
interventions could be substituted at institutions
with fewer information technology resources. For
example, no technology is required to measure distances
in the patient’s environment and set daily distance
goals, which can be posted in patient rooms.
Goal-setting activities to improve patient outcomes,
such as achieving a certain amount of fluid intake
per shift or making sure patients turn, cough, and
breathe deeply are common in nursing practice. The
ambulation goals can be set in collaboration with
patients in the same fashion. Depending on each institution’s
technology infrastructure, other nontechnologic
interventions could include changing how
physicians order ambulation, modifying nursing care
plans, inserting ambulation orders into care organization
worksheets, changing how ambulation is documented,
and providing education and reminders to
nurses by way of staff meetings, posters, and frequent