Icing & elevation:
Ice and elevate above the level of the heart regularly throughout the day and night
Can use the ice machine or other icing agents 15 - 20 minutes every other hour, with a pillow case or other thin barrier between skin and ice pack to avoid skin irritation
Immediately post-op with gauze dressing still on: OK to leave ice machine on constantly as the dressing will provide a strong buffer against the cold
Weight bearing:
Progress to weight bearing as tolerated. Use the crutches to assist your walking and wean off after one week or as soon as you can walk without a limp
Use crutches (or crutch) for 1 week post-op to control swelling and inflammation no matter how well you are walking
Activity level:
Minimize walking and standing for the first week to minimize swelling and inflammation. Swelling will lead to pain, stiffness, muscle shutdown, and increased scar tissue formation. Spend more time icing and elevating
Take it easy; you just had surgery
Avoid impact and twisting of the knee for 4 weeks
Stretching and strengthening exercises:
Refer to the illustrated exercise handout from your Physical Therapist
Should have full knee extension equal to opposite side by Day 3 post-op
Make sure you are following the prescribed pain medication schedule in order to better tolerate the exercises
Can perform upper extremity training and abdominal/back/trunk training immediately as tolerated
Can start well-leg stationary biking immediately as tolerated.• If you continue to improve each day and have no problems with swelling, you can ride a stationary bike with both legs beginning 1 week after surgery. Start easy with light or no resistance for 10 minutes max and gradually progress day-by-day if your knee does not swell much and does not have increased pain by the next morning
 Clinic visits:
Day 14 nurse check-up and suture removal
Month 1: Check-up with Dr. Stone
Physical Therapy appointments should be initiated within 3 days post-op
Exercise post-surgical guidelines
All exercises are to be performed without increasing pain or swelling

Week 1:
Open-chain exercises including leg raises.
Well-leg biking.
Upper body and trunk training.
Gait training to normalize patterns.
Standing calf raises. 
Weight shift in mutiple planes.
Seated or standing trunk mobility exercises (trunk rotation, side-bending)
Single-leg balancing
Bridging
 Weeks 2 - 3:
Mini and split squats
Wide-based walks with Theraband looped around ankle (Monster Walks)
Light 2-legged stationary biking with light or no resistance
Mini step-ups with perfect knee biomechanics
Single-leg balancing with perturbation
Deep water work-outs. Flutter kicks
Elliptical cardio machine (light resistance, no more than 20 minutes)
 Week 4:
Low-impact lateral agility work
Functional squatting and lunging
Outdoor road biking--avoid steep hills
Moderate step-ups
Train for components of sport-specific activities such as lateral lunges for skiers
Progress intensity of exercises per patient and symptom tolerance
VersaClimber cardio machine
 Week 6 and beyond:
Progressive return to sports activities
Avoid cutting and pivoting until Week 8