Nutrient	Action(s)	Good Sources
Vitamin A	Helps maintain nerve cell sheaths	Fortified dairy products
Beta-carotene (which is converted to vitamin A)	Helps maintain nerve cell sheaths	Spinach, dark leafy green vegetables, broccoli, deep orange fruits and veggies (apricots, cantaloupe, squash, carrots, sweet potatoes, and pumpkin)
Thiamin	Supports nervous system function	Pork, ham, liver, whole grains, legumes (beans and peas), nuts
Niacin	Also supports a healthy nervous system	Milk, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, nuts, whole grain and enriched breads and cereals
Vitamin B12	Maintains the sheath that surrounds and protects nerve fibers and promotes their normal growth	All animal based foods; for vegans, fortified soy milk or yeast grown in a vitamin B12 rich environment are recommended
Copper	Helps form the protective covering of nerves	Grains, nuts, meats, seeds, some drinking water
After surgery, eating properly can help with the recovery process. Obtaining adequate calories and protein is vital. Protein is extremely important for recuperation. Not only is it required for fighting infections, it is the backbone for repair and maintenance of many crucial tissues in the body. In addition, protein is vital for building collagen, which is necessary for scar formation.

In addition, plasma proteins, formed from dietary proteins, maintain fluid and electrolyte balance.

Other important nutrients specific to wound healing include:

Nutrient	Good Sources
Vitamin C	Citrus fruits, cabbage, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, dark green vegetables, cantaloupe, strawberries, peppers, lettuce, tomatoes, potatoes, papayas, mangoes
Zinc	Meat, fish, poultry, beans
A person with post-surgery complications or depleted nutrition stores needs more calories and protein than s/he did before the procedure, regardless of his or her weight. A higher caloric intake also increases the need for B-vitamins. Supplements usually are not necessary since these nutrients are found in a wide array of foods.

As there are no supplements that are recommended for enhanced recovery, get your nutrients from a well-balanced eating plan, rich in a variety of fruits, veggies, legumes, whole grains, and lean proteins, such as lean meats and low-fat dairy products. Happy healing!